Take the boy to you: he sotroubles me,
'Tis past enduring.
Come, my gracious lord,
Shall I be yourplayfellow?
No, I'll none of you.
You'll kiss me hardand speak to me as
if I were a baby still.I love you better.
And why so, my lord?
Not for because
Your brows are blacker;yet black brows, they say,
Become some women best, sothat there be not
Too much hair there, butin a semicircle
Or a half-moon made with apen.
Who taught you this?
I learnt it out ofwomen's faces.
Pray now what colourare your eyebrows?
Blue, my lord.
Nay, that's a mock: I haveseen a lady's nose
That has been blue, butnot her eyebrows.
Hark ye;
The queen your motherrounds apace: we shall
Present our services to afine new prince
One of these days; and thenyou'ld wanton with us,
If we would have you.
She is spread of late
Into a goodly bulk: goodtime encounter her!
What wisdom stirsamongst you? Come, sir,
now I am for you again:pray you, sit by us,
And tell 's a tale.
Merry or sad shall't be?
As merry as you will.
A sad tale's best for winter:
I have one of spritesand goblins.
Let's have that, good sir.
Come on, sit down: comeon, and do your best
To fright me with your sprites;you're powerful at it.
There was a man--
Nay, come, sit down; thenon.
Dwelt by a churchyard: Iwill tell it softly;
Yond crickets shall nothear it.
Come on, then,
And give't me in mine ear.
Was he met there? histrain? Camillo with him?
Behind the tuft of pines Imet them; never
Saw I men scour so ontheir way: I eyed them
Even to their ships.
How blest am I
In my just censure, in mytrue opinion!
Alack, for lesserknowledge! how accursed
In being so blest! Theremay be in the cup
A spider steep'd, and onemay drink, depart,
And yet partake no venom,for his knowledge
Is not infected: but ifone present
The abhorr'd ingredient tohis eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he crackshis gorge, his sides,
With violent hefts. I havedrunk,
and seen the spider.
Camillo was his help inthis, his pander:
There is a plot against mylife, my crown;
All's true that is mistrusted:that false villain
Whom I employ'd waspre-employ'd by him:
He has discover'd mydesign, and I
Remain a pinch'd thing;yea, a very trick
For them to play at will.
How came the posternsSo easily open?
By his great authority;
Which often hath no lessprevail'd than so
On your command.
I know't too well.
Give me the boy: I am gladyou did not nurse him:
Though he does bearsome signs of me,
yet you have toomuch blood in him.
What is this? sport?
Bear the boy hence; heshall not come about her;
Away with him! and let hersport herself
With that she's big with;for 'tis Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus.
But I'ld say he had not,
And I'll be sworn youwould believe my saying,
Howe'er you lean to thenayward.
You, my lords,
Look on her, mark herwell; be but about
To say 'she is a goodly lady,'
and the justice of yourbearts will thereto add
'Tis pity she's nothonest, honourable:'
Praise her but for thisher without-door form,
Which on my faith deserveshigh speech, and straight
The shrug, the hum or ha,these petty brands
That calumny doth use--O,I am out--
That mercy does, forcalumny will sear
Virtue itself:
these shrugs, these humsand ha's,
When you have said 'she'sgoodly,' come between
Ere you can say 'she'shonest:' but be 't known,
From him that has most causeto grieve it should be,
She's an adulteress.
Should a villain say so,
The most replenish'dvillain in the world,
He were as much morevillain: you, my lord,
Do but mistake.
You have mistook, my lady,
Polixenes for Leontes: Othou thing!
Which I'll not call acreature of thy place,
Lest barbarism, making methe precedent,
Should a like language useto all degrees
And mannerlydistinguishment leave out
Betwixt the prince andbeggar: I have said
She's an adulteress; Ihave said with whom:
More, she's a traitor andCamillo is
A federary with her, andone that knows
What she should shame toknow herself
But with her most vileprincipal, that she's
A bed-swerver, even as badas those
That vulgars give bold'sttitles, ay, and privy
To this their late escape.
No, by my life.
Privy to none of this. Howwill this grieve you,
When you shall come toclearer knowledge,
that You thus have publish'dme! Gentle my lord,
You scarce can right methroughly then to say
You did mistake.
No; if I mistake
In those foundations whichI build upon,
The centre is not bigenough to bear
A school-boy's top. Awaywith her! to prison!
He who shall speak for heris afar off guilty
But that he speaks.
There's some ill planetreigns:
I must be patient till theheavens look
With an aspect morefavourable.
Good my lords,
I am not prone to weeping,as our sex
Commonly are; the want ofwhich vain dew
Perchance shall dry yourpities: but I have
That honourable grieflodged here which burns
Worse than tears drown:beseech you all, my lords,
With thoughts so qualifiedas your charities
Shall best instructyou, measure me;
and so the king'swill be perform'd!
Shall I be heard?
Who is't that goes withme? Beseech your highness,
My women may be with me;for you see
My plight requires it. Donot weep, good fools;
There is no cause: when youshall know your mistress
Has deserved prison, thenabound in tears
As I come out: this actionI now go on
Is for my better grace.Adieu, my lord:
I never wish'd tosee you sorry;
now I trust I shall.
My women, come;you have leave.
Go, do our bidding; hence!
Beseech your highness,call the queen again.
Be certain what you do,sir, lest your justice
Prove violence; in the whichthree great ones suffer,
Yourself, your queen, yourson.
For her, my lord,
I dare my life lay downand will do't, sir,
Please you to accept it,that the queen is spotless
I' the eyes of heaven andto you; I mean,
In this which you accuseher.
If it prove she's otherwise,
I'll keep my stables
where I lodge my wife; I'llgo in couples with her;
Than when I feel and seeher no farther trust her;
For every inch of woman inthe world,
Ay, every dram of woman'sflesh is false, If she be.
Hold your peaces.
Good my lord,--
It is for you we speak,not for ourselves:
You are abused and by someputter-on
That will be damn'd for't;would I knew the villain,
I would land-damn him. Beshe honour-flaw'd,
I have three daughters;the eldest is eleven
The second and the third,nine, and some five;
If this prove true,they'll pay for't:
by mine honour,
I'll geld 'em all; fourteenthey shall not see,
To bring false generations:they are co-heirs;
And I had rather glibmyself than they
Should not produce fairissue.
Cease; no more.
You smell this businesswith a sense as cold
As is a dead man's nose:but I do see't and feel't
As you feel doing thus;and see withal
The instruments that feel.
If it be so,
We need no grave to buryhonesty:
There's not a grain of itthe face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy earth.
What! lack I credit?
I had rather you did lackthan I, my lord,
Upon this ground; and moreit would content me
To have her honour truethan your suspicion,
Be blamed for't how youmight.
Why, what need we
Commune with you of this,but rather follow
Our forceful instigation?Our prerogative
Calls not your counsels,but our natural goodness
Imparts this; which ifyou, or stupefied
Or seeming so in skill,cannot or will not
Relish a truth like us,inform yourselves
We need no more of youradvice: the matter,
The loss, the gain, theordering on't, is all
Properly ours.
And I wish, my liege,
You had only in yoursilent judgment tried it,
Without more overture.
How could that be?
Either thou art mostignorant by age,
Or thou wert born a fool.Camillo's flight,
Added to theirfamiliarity,
Which was as gross as evertouch'd conjecture,
That lack'd sight only,nought for approbation
But only seeing, all othercircumstances
Made up to the deed, dothpush on this proceeding:
Yet, for a greaterconfirmation,
For in an act of thisimportance 'twere
Most piteous to be wild, Ihave dispatch'd in post
To sacred Delphos, toApollo's temple,
Cleomenes and Dion, whomyou know
Of stuff'd sufficiency:now from the oracle
They will bring all; whosespiritual counsel had,
Shall stop or spur me.Have I done well?
Well done, my lord.
Though I am satisfied andneed no more
Than what I know, yetshall the oracle
Give rest to the minds ofothers, such as he
Whose ignorant credulitywill not
Come up to the truth. Sohave we thought it good
From our free person sheshould be confined,
Lest that the treachery ofthe two fled hence
Be left her to perform.Come, follow us;
We are to speak in public;for this business
Will raise us all.
To laughter, as I take it,
If the good truth wereknown.
The keeper of the prison,call to him;
let him have knowledge whoI am.
Good lady,
No court in Europe is toogood for thee;
What dost thou then inprison?
Now, good sir,
You know me, do you not?
For a worthy lady
And one whom much Ihonour.
Pray you then,
Conduct me to the queen.
I may not, madam:
To the contrary I haveexpress commandment.
Here's ado,
To lock up honesty andhonour
from the access ofgentle visitors!
Is't lawful, pray you,
To see her women? any ofthem? Emilia?
So please you, madam,
To put apart theseyour attendants,
I shall bring Emilia forth.
I pray now, call her.
Withdraw yourselves.
And, madam,
I must be present at yourconference.
Well, be't so, prithee.
Here's such ado to make nostain a stain
As passes colouring.
Dear gentlewoman,
How fares our graciouslady?
As well as one so greatand so forlorn
May hold together: on herfrights and griefs,
Which never tender ladyhath born greater,
She is something beforeher time deliver'd.
A boy?
A daughter, and a goodlybabe,
Lusty and like to live:the queen receives
Much comfort in't; says'My poor prisoner,
I am innocent as you.'
I dare be sworn
These dangerous unsafelunes i' the king,
beshrew them!
He must be told on't, andhe shall: the office
Becomes a woman best; I'lltake't upon me:
If I prove honey-mouth'dlet my tongue blister
And never to my red-look'danger be
The trumpet any more. Prayyou, Emilia,
Commend my best obedienceto the queen:
If she dares trust me withher little babe,
I'll show't the king andundertake to be
Her advocate to theloud'st. We do not know
How he may soften at thesight o' the child:
The silence often of pureinnocence
Persuades when speakingfails.
Most worthy madam,
Your honour and yourgoodness is so evident
That your free undertakingcannot miss
A thriving issue: there isno lady living
So meet for this greaterrand. Please your ladyship
To visit the next room,I'll presently
Acquaint the queen of yourmost noble offer;
Who but to-day hammer'd ofthis design,
But durst not tempt aminister of honour,
Lest she should be denied.
Tell her, Emilia.
I'll use that tongue Ihave: if wit flow from't
As boldness from my bosom,let 't not be doubted
I shall do good.
Now be you blest for it!
I'll to the queen: pleaseyou,
come something nearer.
Madam, if't please thequeen to send the babe,
I know not what I shallincur to pass it,
Having no warrant.
You need not fear it, sir:
This child was prisoner tothe womb and is
By law and process ofgreat nature thence
Freed and enfranchised,not a party to
The anger of the king norguilty of,
If any be, the trespass ofthe queen.
I do believe it.
Do not you fear: upon minehonour,
I will stand betwixt youand danger.
Nor night nor day no rest:it is but weakness
To bear the matter thus;mere weakness. If
The cause were not inbeing,--part o' the cause,
She the adulteress; forthe harlot king
Is quite beyond mine arm,out of the blank
And level of my brain,plot-proof; but she
I can hook to me: say thatshe were gone,
Given to the fire, amoiety of my rest
Might come to me again.Who's there?
My lord?
How does the boy?
He took good restto-night;
'Tis hoped his sickness isdischarged.
To see his nobleness!
Conceiving the dishonourof his mother,
He straight declined,droop'd, took it deeply,
Fasten'd and fix'd theshame on't in himself,
Threw off his spirit, hisappetite, his sleep,
And downright languish'd.Leave me solely: go,
See how he fares.
Fie, fie! no thought ofhim:
The thought of my revengesthat way
Recoil upon me: in himselftoo mighty,
And in his parties, hisalliance; let him be
Until a time may serve:for present vengeance,
Take it on her. Camilloand Polixenes
Laugh at me, make theirpastime at my sorrow:
They should not laugh if Icould reach them, nor
Shall she within my power.
You must not enter.
Nay, rather, good mylords, be second to me:
Fear you his tyrannouspassion
more, alas, than thequeen's life?
a gracious innocent soul,
More free than he isjealous.
That's enough.
Madam, he hath not slepttonight;
commanded none should comeat him.
Not so hot, good sir:
I come to bring him sleep.
'Tis such as you,
That creep like shadows byhim
and do sigh at each hisneedless heavings,
such as you nourish thecause of his awaking:
I do come with words asmedicinal as true,
Honest as either, to purgehim of that humour
That presses him fromsleep.
What noise there, ho?
No noise, my lord; butneedful conference
About some gossips foryour highness.
How!
Away with that audaciouslady! Antigonus,
I charged thee that sheshould not come about me:
I knew she would.
I told her so, my lord,
On your displeasure'speril and on mine,
She should not visit you.
What, canst not rule her?
From all dishonesty hecan: in this,
Unless he take the coursethat you have done,
Commit me for committinghonour,
trust it,
He shall not rule me.
La you now, you hear:
When she will take therein I let her run;
But she'll not stumble.
Good my liege, I come;
And, I beseech you,hear me,
who profess myself your loyalservant, your physician,
Your most obedientcounsellor,
yet that dare less appear soin comforting your evils,
Than such as most seemyours:
I say, I come
From your good queen.
Good queen!
Good queen, my lord,
Good queen; I say goodqueen;
And would by combat makeher good,
so were I a man, the worstabout you.
Force her hence.
Let him that makes buttrifles of his eyes
First hand me: on mine ownaccord I'll off;
But first I'll do myerrand.
The good queen,
For she is good, hath broughtyou forth a daughter;
Here 'tis;
commends it to yourblessing.
Out!
A mankind witch! Hencewith her, out o' door:
A most intelligencingbawd!
Not so:
I am as ignorant in thatas you
In so entitling me, and noless honest
Than you are mad;
which is enough, I'llwarrant,
As this world goes, topass for honest.
Traitors!
Will you not push her out?
Give her the bastard. Thoudotard!
thou art woman-tired, unroostedthy dame Partlet here.
Take up the bastard;
Take't up, I say; give'tto thy crone.
For ever unvenerable bethy hands,
if thou takest up the princessby that forced baseness
Which he has put upon't!
He dreads his wife.
So I would you did;
then 'twere past alldoubt,
you'ld call your childrenyours.
A nest of traitors!
I am none, by this goodlight.
Nor I, nor any but onethat's here,
and that's himself, for he
The sacred honour ofhimself, his queen's,
His hopeful son's, hisbabe's, betrays to slander,
Whose sting is sharperthan the sword's;
and will not--
For, as the case nowstands,
it is a curse
He cannot be compell'dto't--once remove
The root of his opinion,which is rotten
As ever oak or stone wassound.
A callat
Of boundless tongue, wholate hath beat her husband
And now baits me! Thisbrat is none of mine;
It is the issue ofPolixenes:
Hence with it, andtogether with the dam
Commit them to the fire!
It is yours;
And, might we lay the oldproverb to your charge,
So like you, 'tis theworse. Behold, my lords,
Although the print belittle,
the whole matter and copyof the father,
eye, nose, lip,
The trick of's frown, hisforehead, nay, the valley,
The pretty dimples of hischin and cheek,
His smiles,
The very mould and frameof hand, nail, finger:
And thou, good goddessNature, which hast made it
So like to him
that got it, if thou hast theordering of the mind too,
'mongst all colours
No yellow in't, lest shesuspect, as he does,
Her children not herhusband's!
A gross hag
And, lozel, thou artworthy to be hang'd,
That wilt not stay hertongue.
Hang all the husbands
That cannot do that feat,
you'll leave yourselfhardly one subject.
Once more, take her hence.
A most unworthy andunnatural lord
Can do no more.
I'll ha' thee burnt.
I care not:
It is an heretic thatmakes the fire,
Not she which burns in't.
I'll not call you tyrant;
But this most cruel usageof your queen,
Not able to produce moreaccusation
Than your own weak-hingedfancy, something savours
Of tyranny and willignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to theworld.
On your allegiance,
Out of the chamber withher! Were I a tyrant,
Where were her life? shedurst not call me so,
If she did know me one.Away with her!
I pray you, do not pushme; I'll be gone.
Look to your babe, mylord; 'tis yours:
Jove send her
A better guiding spirit!What needs these hands?
You, that are thus sotender o'er his follies,
Will never do him good,not one of you.
So, so: farewell; we aregone.
Thou, traitor, hast set onthy wife to this.
My child? away with't!Even thou, that hast
A heart so tender o'er it,take it hence
And see it instantlyconsumed with fire;
Even thou and none butthou. Take it up straight:
Within this hour bring meword 'tis done,
And by good testimony,
or I'll seize thy life, withwhat thou else call'st thine.
If thou refuse and wiltencounter with my wrath,
say so;
The bastard brains withthese my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, takeit to the fire;
For thou set'st on thywife.
I did not, sir:
These lords, my noblefellows, if they please,
Can clear me in't.
We can: my royal liege,
He is not guilty of hercoming hither.
You're liars all.
Beseech your highness,give us better credit:
We have always trulyserved you, and beseech
So to esteem of us, and onour knees we beg,
As recompense of our dearservices
Past and to come, that youdo change this purpose,
Which being so horrible,so bloody,
must lead on to some foulissue: we all kneel.
I am a feather for eachwind that blows:
Shall I live on to seethis bastard kneel
And call me father? betterburn it now
Than curse it then. But beit; let it live.
It shall not neither. You,sir, come you hither;
You that have been sotenderly officious
With Lady Margery, yourmidwife there,
To save this bastard'slife,--for 'tis a bastard,
So sure as this beard'sgrey,
--what will you adventure
To save this brat's life?
Any thing, my lord,
That my ability mayundergo
And nobleness impose: atleast thus much:
I'll pawn the little bloodwhich I have left
To save the innocent: anything possible.
It shall be possible.Swear by this sword
Thou wilt perform mybidding.
I will, my lord.
Mark and perform it,see'st thou!
for the fail of any pointin't
shall not only be Ddeathto thyself
but to thy lewd-tonguedwife,
Whom for this time wepardon. We enjoin thee,
As thou art liege-man tous, that thou carry
This female bastard henceand that thou bear it
To some remote and desertplace quite out
Of our dominions, and thatthere thou leave it,
Without more mercy, to itsown protection
And favour of the climate.As by strange fortune
It came to us, I do injustice charge thee,
On thy soul's peril andthy body's torture,
That thou commend itstrangely to some place
Where chance may nurse orend it. Take it up.
I swear to do this,
though a present death hadbeen more merciful.
Come on, poor babe:
Some powerful spirit instructthe kites and ravens
To be thy nurses! Wolvesand bears, they say
Casting their savagenessaside have done
Like offices of pity.
Sir, be prosperous
In more than this deeddoes require!
And blessing against thiscruelty fight on thy side,
Poor thing, condemn'd toloss!
No, I'll not rear
Another's issue.
Please your highness,
posts from those you sentto the oracle
are come an hour since:
Cleomenes and Dion,
Being well arrived fromDelphos, are both landed,
Hasting to the court.
So please you, sir, theirspeed
Hath been beyond account.
Twenty-three days theyhave been absent:
'tis good speed;
foretells the great Apollo
suddenly will have thetruth of this appear.
Prepare you, lords; Summona session,
that we may arraign ourmost disloyal lady,
for, as she hath beenpublicly accused,
so shall she have a justand open trial.
While she lives
My heart will be a burthento me.
Leave me, and think uponmy bidding.